Homage to the Buddha, the Perfected One, the fully Awakened One

Introduction
This publication is an attempt to relate the Buddha’s life according to what is found in the Pali Tripitaka (referred to henceforth as the ‘suttas’ or ‘scriptures’). Over the millennia, many commentaries and folklore have been passed down in Buddhist countries with a variety of versions of the Buddha’s life being told to us today. The following essays draw from the Pali Tipitaka stories the Buddha himself related of his childhood, his Ministry, the people he encountered and his travels, right up to his final days - from his birth at Lumbini to passing away at Kusinara, hence the title of the compilation “From Lumbini to Kusinara - a life inspired”- Wonderful Journey of Our Gotama Buddha.
Around 2600 years ago the Buddha gave his first sermon at the Deer Park in Varanasi,
India. The sutta was the Dhammachakkapavatavana Sutta, delivered to his former ascetic
companions. For forty-five years following this first sermon, he walked through towns
and villages in the northern and eastern parts of India (then known as Central Region of
Dambadiva- (majjhimadesa), building a monastic order and teaching the dhamma to
people from all walks of life.

The Buddha, who renounced a life of luxury as a royal prince, sought the truth, the way to
eliminate suffering. Many men and women were fortunate enough to become his disciples, even attaining one of the four stages of enlightenment, including the final goal, 
nibb?na.

This booklet was compiled to show gratitude for the Dhamma, the teachings of the Blessed One. It is appropriate at this point to quote from ‘Budugunaalankaraya’ (qualities of the Buddha) by Vidagama Maha Thero:

The Blessed One was honored
and respected by offerings of
scented Coral flowers of heaven.
I have only this humble work
to offer to him, to the Great sage
My offering is like a wild flower
But who can say it is a wrong doing?

Remembering those humble words of the Venerable Vidagama Maha Thero, we offer this
compilation with devotion and respect.

May all beings be happy!
May all beings attain Nibbana!

Compiled and edited by faithful followers of the Blessed One
Santi Forest Monastery
2024-2025
